Our text comments today
highlight this point about a husband.
Notice it says:
“Although he cannot always do
“as she [that is, his wife] asks,
“he often arrives at a more balanced decision
by consulting her.”
Well, those of us who are husbands
know the truthfulness
of those words, don’t we?
Now, there are a number of qualities
that this statement may bring to mind.
And one of those qualities
is the quality of reasonableness.
That’s a quality
that all of us need to display.
How would you describe a reasonable person?
What examples of reasonableness
do we find in Jehovah and Jesus?
And what can we learn from their example?
Well, let’s first consider that description.
Our publications have stated
that a reasonable person is patient, gentle,
and kind in his dealings
with himself and with others.
He takes into consideration
others’ limitations and their circumstances.
Someone with a reputation of being reasonable
is flexible when circumstances warrant it.
It’s like that husband
that we just mentioned.
When he is reasonable
as he consults with his wife,
he’s willing to listen to her
and, when appropriate,
to go along with her wishes.
Now notice with me at Philippians 4:5
the inspired counsel
about this quality of reasonableness.
Please turn there in Philippians chapter 4,
and notice what the Bible tells us
in the A portion of verse 5.
It states:
“Let your reasonableness
become known to all men.”
So others should see us
displaying this quality.
Another translation renders the verse:
“Have a reputation for being reasonable.”
So notice, it’s not so much
how we view ourselves,
whether we feel we’re reasonable,
rather, it’s how others see us
—how we are known,
if we have the reputation
of being reasonable.
When you think about it,
reasonableness attracts, doesn’t it,
whereas unreasonableness tends to drive away?
Well, now that we have that description,
what examples of reasonableness
do we find in Jehovah and Jesus?
Let’s consider Jehovah’s example first.
And if you turn with me
to Leviticus chapter 5,
let’s look at an example
of his reasonableness
with the nation of Israel.
Leviticus chapter 5,
and notice there in verse 5 to begin.
It says: “If he becomes guilty
as respects one of these things
“[talking about someone
who’s committed a sin, it says],
then he must confess in what he has sinned.”
Verse 6:
“He will also bring his guilt offering
“to Jehovah for the sin that he committed,
“namely, a female from the flock,
either a female lamb or a young female goat,
for a sin offering.”
So that was plain.
But notice
Jehovah’s reasonableness in verse 7:
“If, though, he cannot afford a sheep,
“he must bring to Jehovah two turtledoves
or two young pigeons
as his guilt offering for the sin.”
So that was reasonable on Jehovah’s part.
But Jehovah took it a step further.
Notice verse 11:
“Now if he cannot afford
two turtledoves or two young pigeons,
“he must bring as his offering for his sin
a tenth of an ephah
of fine flour for a sin offering.”
So notice, Jehovah
was reasonable in what he expected,
depending on
the Israelites’ financial circumstances.
As we read verse 11, you may have wondered,
‘Well, what’s a tenth of an ephah?’
Well, our footnote helps us.
You notice what it says?
“A tenth of an ephah equaled 2.2 L
(2 dry qt).”
Notice this image of an Israelite woman.
She’s of very limited means,
and she’s holding out
—possibly to give to the priest—
her sin offering of two quarts of flour.
It wasn’t much, was it?
Here in Leviticus,
it was as if Jehovah was saying:
‘If you don’t have enough
for a lamb or a goat, that’s OK.
for those two small birds, don’t worry.
Just bring me two quarts
of flour as your sacrifice.’
Well, imagine how happy a poor Israelite
like this woman would have been
that Jehovah valued her small offering
just as much
as one of the costlier sacrifices
presented by her wealthier neighbors!
But did you notice an important detail
there in verse 11 about the flour?
The flour that the needy Israelite
was to offer wasn’t just any type of flour.
Did you see there in the verse?
It was to be fine flour,
such as that used to prepare
a meal for an honored guest.
So though the poor Israelite
couldn’t give as much as others,
the little they offered to Jehovah
was to be their best.
In effect, Jehovah was saying,
‘I realize you can’t offer as much as others,
but I know, I know, that you’re going
to give me your best.’
What’s the lesson?
Jehovah displays reasonableness
by taking into consideration
our limitations and our circumstances.
You know, some brothers and sisters can offer
in their service
the equivalent of a lamb or a goat.
Others can offer the equivalent
of two turtledoves or two pigeons.
And perhaps in the past, some of us
were able to offer the same
in our assignments.
But right now, because of our circumstances,
because of limitations,
maybe we’re not able to.
Well, what do we know about Jehovah?
He graciously and reasonably accepts our best
in his service even if that’s comparable
to two quarts of fine flour.
What a reasonable God we worship
and a good lesson for us to be reasonable
and not compare ourselves with others
or to expect more than we should
of our brothers and sisters!
Now, what about Jesus’ example?
He set an example in reasonableness
by being patient and kind in his dealings
with his disciples
despite their shortcomings.
Let’s notice an example.
Turn with me to Luke chapter 22,
and let’s notice an example
of Jesus’ reasonableness.
Luke chapter 22
—the setting is shortly before Jesus’ death,
and he’s aware that Peter
is soon going to deny him three times.
So, what did Jesus do?
He encouraged Peter.
Notice verse 32.
Jesus said: “But I have made supplication
“for you that your faith may not give out;
and you, once you have returned,
strengthen your brothers.”
Notice the encouragement?
Jesus said:
“I have made supplication for you.”
In other words,
Jesus prayed in Peter’s behalf
that Peter’s faith not give out.
And then he told him:
“Once you have returned,
strengthen your brothers.”
Jesus expressed confidence that Peter,
after a short lapse,
would return to faithful service
and he would strengthen his brothers
—and that despite the fact,
you notice in verse 34,
Jesus told him,
‘You’re going to deny me three times.’
Now, how does this account
show reasonableness on Jesus’ part?
Well, you may remember
what Jesus had said sometime earlier,
as recorded at Matthew 10:33.
He said: “Whoever disowns me
before men,
I will also disown him.”
Now, that was a strong statement,
and Jesus could have applied that to Peter.
But demonstrating reasonableness,
Jesus didn’t reject Peter.
Why?
Because Jesus knew
that there were going to be
extenuating circumstances.
He was willing to forgive
his repentant apostle
and express confidence
in what Peter would do in the future.
So the lesson?
We should look for the good in our brothers.
Brother Splane highlighted that
on Saturday for us, didn’t he?
Despite their imperfections,
we should express confidence
and faith in our brothers.
We should be reasonable
in what we expect of others.
Who knows?
They may be facing challenges
that we either don’t know about
or that we don’t fully understand.
One Watchtower stated this:
“How much better it is
to commend our brothers
for what they do than to judge them
for what they do not do!”
Like Jesus, let’s be reasonable
when love calls for it
and circumstances warrant it.
Well, what have we considered?
A reasonable person
is patient, kind, and gentle
in his dealings with himself and with others.
He takes into consideration the limitations
and the circumstances of others.
Reasonableness attracts,
unreasonableness tends to drive away.
What excellent examples we have
in reasonableness with Jehovah and Jesus!
Remember the fine flour
and the need to look for the good in others,
expressing confidence in them.
So as we go about our day,
may we look for opportunities
to let our reasonableness
become known to all men.